[TM] Chp4-2 First steps of labeling using a point layer (#3433)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: source/docs/training_manual/vector_classification/label_tool.rst

|LS| The Label Tool
===============================================================================

Labels can be added to a map to show information about an object. Any
vector layer can have labels associated with it. These labels rely on the
attribute data of a layer for their content.

**The goal for this lesson:** To apply useful and good-looking labels to a
layer.

|basic| |FA| Using Labels
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In order to display textual information about a layer using its attributes:

#. Select the :guilabel:`places` layer and press the |symbology| :sup:`Open

>    Layer Styling panel` button. You can as well use the :guilabel:`Layer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Layer Styling panel` button. You can also use the :guilabel:`Layer
```

   properties` dialog.
#. Enable the |labeling| :sup:`Labels` tab.
#. Select :guilabel:`Single labels` from the drop-down menu.

   .. image:: img/select_single_labels.png
      :align: center

   |

   The dialog is filled with multiple options.

>    You'll need to choose which field in the attributes will be used for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You will need to choose the field /attribute to use for labelling.
```

>    labels. In the previous lesson, you decided that the :guilabel:`name` field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In the previous lesson, you decided that the :guilabel:`name` field
```

   was the most suitable for this purpose.

#. Select :guilabel:`name` from the list next to the :guilabel:`Label with`
   option:

   .. image:: img/select_label_with.png
      :align: center

   |

   Depending on your OS, you may not have the same default options (e.g. font,
   size). This is not an issue.

#. Click :guilabel:`Apply`. If the |checkbox| :guilabel:`Live update` option is
   checked, this is not necessary as the changes are immediately propagated to
   the map canvas.

The map should now have labels, like this:

.. image:: img/first_place_names.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60

|basic| |FA| Changing Label Options
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Depending on the styles you chose for your map in earlier lessons, you
might find that the labels are not appropriately formatted and either overlap or
are too far away from their point markers. Or you may simply not like the

> default rendering. Let's explore some of the label options to repair that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default rendering. Let's explore some of the label options to fix that.
```

#. Reopen the |labeling| :guilabel:`Labels` tab.
#. Select the |labelbuffer| :sup:`Buffer` tab in the upper-hand  options list
   (or left-hand if you are in the :guilabel:`Layer Properties` panel - in this
   case remember to click :guilabel:`Apply` to see your changes on the map).
#. Tick the checkbox of the |unchecked| :guilabel:`Draw text buffer` option,

>    then set a buffer :guilabel:`Size` of ``0.8 mm``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   then set a buffer :guilabel:`Size` to ``0.8 mm``:
```

   .. image:: img/buffer_options.png
      :align: center

   |

   You'll see that this adds a colored buffer or border to the place labels,
   making them easier to pick out on the map:

   .. image:: img/buffer_results.png
      :align: center
      :scale: 60

   |

>    However, the labels appear too large next to the other features on the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Now the labels appear too large next to the other features on the map.
```

> #. Enable the |text| :guilabel:`Text` tab and set a lower :guilabel:`Size`, e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Enable the |text| :guilabel:`Text` tab and set a smaller :guilabel:`Size`, e.g.
```

   ``8 points``.

>    Better but these long labels are still not good looking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Better, but these long labels are still not good looking.
```

#. Go to the |labelformatting| :guilabel:`Formatting` tab and set the
   :guilabel:`Wrap lines to` option to ``20 characters`` as :guilabel:`Maximum
   line length`.
   
   .. image:: img/label_formatting_result.png
      :align: center
      :scale: 60

   |

   That's the font problem solved! Now let's look at the problem of the labels
   overlapping the points.
   
#. Select the |labelplacement| :sup:`Placement` tab and check the |radioButtonOn|
   :guilabel:`Cartographic` placement.
#. Set the :guilabel:`Distance` to ``1 mm`` as an offset :guilabel:`From symbol
   bounds`:

   .. image:: img/offset_placement_settings.png
      :align: center

   |

You'll see that the labels are no longer overlapping their point markers.

.. image:: img/fixed_place_names.png
   :align: center
   :scale: 60

.. Todo: Use DD button to constrain the label to the right of the marker
 instead of the default top right or let it fo the DD settings section (would

>  require to save the style - not taught yet!)

Reviewer: Is this necessary? Where is the DD button?

Reviewer: OK.

In QGIS, you can do this by changing the position of the labels to be rendered
directly over the points they refer to.

#. Open the :guilabel:`Layer labeling settings` dialog for the
   :guilabel:`places` layer
#. Select the |labelplacement| :guilabel:`Placement` option from the options list.
#. Click on the :guilabel:`Offset from point` button

   This will reveal the :guilabel:`Quadrant` options which you can use to set

>    the position of the label in relation to the point marker. In this case, we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the position of the label relative to the point marker. In this case, we
```
